legend actually it one is more look at
the third difference between the
typefaces that is yeah can Policy Forum
at nine and then a book jacket meeting
at Simon and Schuster at 10:30 p.m.
Eastern Time now a look at US
intelligence activities in Central
Europe after the Second World War
last month the Central Intelligence
Agency sponsored this forum several
former agents described post-war
intelligence and their roles within it
good morning I'm Ken McDonald of 1981 to
1995 I was chief historian for CIA and
was and retired in last September I
actually had some part three or four
years ago in CIA agreeing to sponsor
this conference and I wanted to make
sure I retired before I had to actually
do any work in the preparation for it I
should say at the outset of this panel
we owe credit as for so much in this
panel in this whole conference to kevin
rough news work who basically recruited
and organized this panel and it's a
wonderful panel and I'm honored to have
an opportunity to chair it let me tell
you how will organize it we have six
panelists and I've asked each one to
speak for no more than ten minutes at
the outset and we will go in the order
that they are on the program after that
we will carry on we should have the
better part of an hour for a roundtable
discussion which will of course include
opportunity for questions and comments
from the audience as an old teacher I
thought it might be useful just to say a
few words at the outset I think many of
you know much more about this period
than I do but then some of you may know
less and I thought it might be useful
just to mention some landmark dates
because this this is a very interesting
period this first ten years nine or ten
years after the second war for a lot of
reasons but in the in history of
intelligence it's really confusing
organizationally so without boring you
and too much detail let me just mention
a few dates OSS the Office of Strategic
Services was disbanded at the end of the
Second World War and actually went out
of existence as an organization on the
1st of October 1945 just weeks after v-j
day however parts of it work saved the
research and analysis branch the
ancestor of the Directorate of
intelligence today in CIA went to the
State Department where it fairly quickly
died in fact but the operational units
particularly those stations abroad were
retained as the Strategic Services Unit
and that was the real way the operating
arm of OSS and that was put into the War
Department and then in January 1946
President Truman having dissolved OSS
but having recognized that some kind of
intelligence organization was needed
form the Central Intelligence Group C IG
and appointed the first Director of
Central Intelligence the DCI the
Strategic Services Unit was gradually
folded into the Central Intelligence
Group beginning really in the summer of
1946 when General Vanderburgh defendant
Berg was director the CIA itself was not
founded until the National Security Act
in 1947 and came into existence on the
18th of September 1947 so we have a 50th
anniversary next year the covert action
branch which was fairly autonomous but
nominally under CIA was the what became
the office of policy coordination was
formed in June of 1948 the real
expansion and a great reorganization of
CIA occurred after the outbreak of the
Korean War under the leadership of
general Bedell Smith as director of
Central Intelligence beginning in
October 1953 the end of this period this
very 1945 1954 that's announced actually
includes the first year or so of Allen
Dulles tenure as director he became
director at the beginning of the
Eisenhower administration in the
beginning of 1953 so those are those
that's the sort of chronological
framework within which we'll be talking
today about the role of intelligence in
the beginning of the Cold War now what
I'd like to do is introduce all the
members of our panel each one and then
we will I will ask them to speak each in
turn as I mentioned first is James
Crutchfield he has an honor
ROTC graduate of the University of North
Dakota in 1939
James Crutchfield took a regular Army
Commission went on active duty and
served throughout the second
war as an armor officer great
distinction in campaigns in North Africa
Italy France and Germany I think he once
told me that in all of that service he
never actually heard of OSS after the
war the army sent him he can deny that
after the war the army sent him for a
year's graduate study at Columbia
University but in the spring of 1946 he
returned to Europe as chief of the
counterintelligence for the American
occupation Army in Germany he found the
intelligence community in Germany at
that time close to a disaster he was I
had an opportunity to do something quite
different which turned out quite well in
1947 1948 he went to Austria set up a
centralized US intelligence effort there
in 1948 he joined CIA who sent to
Germany to develop the first Soviet
operations base he was almost
immediately diverted to look at the
Army's what was called then the
operation rusty the Gailen organization
for almost eight years he was a CIA
officer with the responsible for the
gala an organization and a topic which
he'll tell us more about shortly after
returning to Washington he served two
years as chief of the Directorate of
plans East European division later was
the first national intelligence officer
for energy had a distinguished career
since retiring he has been and is about
to complete a book on his Germany's
transition from enemy to a line based
largely on his personal experiences our
second speaker will be the Honorable
Richard Helms Richard Helms is one of
the great figures in the history of
American intelligence graduate of
Williams College in the class of 1935 he
served in the late 1930s as a foreign
correspondent for United Press in Europe
soon after the United States entered
World War two he was commissioned the
Naval Reserve Officer and was serving in
anti-submarine warfare when he was
assigned to OSS in 1943 he went abroad
with si secret intelligence branch
ending the war in Berlin where he
succeeded Allen Dulles as chief of the
base there he remained in the Strategic
Services Unit and moved through the
evolution from Central Intelligence
Group to Central Intelligence Agency
from 1962 to 65 he was deputy director
for plan
head of the operational the spy
department of CIA and President Johnson
appointed him first as Deputy Director
of Central Intelligence 1965 and as
Director of Central Intelligence in 1966
he served the CIA's director under both
Johnson and Nixon which is no mean feat
in itself retired in early 1973 to serve
as US ambassador to Iran until 1977 and
we're privileged to have him with us
today
the next speaker will be David Murphy
who graduated from Courtland college in
1942 did graduate work in Russian
Studies at the Army's insistent I think
at the University of California Berkeley
he served with the Central Intelligence
Group and CIA in Korea and Japan until
1950 in January 51 he headed the
combined Office of Special Operations
Office of policy coordination the two
rival parts of the clandestine service
at that time their Soviet operation
based in Munich from 54 to 61 he was in
Berlin as deputy to the venn base chief
he was chief of the East European
division and then as chief of the Soviet
Russian division I think that was around
63 overseas again from 68 to 73 he
became national intelligence officer for
him to be responsible for integrating
analytical requirements and operations
against the Soviet Union after retired
from 76 until retirement he served as a
special assistant to the DIA defense
intelligence agency director research on
Soviet deep underground command command
and control facilities he is currently
completing a book very interesting book
collaborating with a retired KGB general
on the Berlin and the Cold War the next
speaker will be Lieutenant General
William W Quinn the US Army retired
general Quinn is the 1933 graduate at
West Point whose long and distinguished
military career included service as an
intelligence officer and the great
campaigns the Second World War in Europe
and this brought him in contact with the
work of OSS officers in the European
campaigns in October 1945 he was
assigned as executive officer of the new
newly-formed strategic services unit
which was to take into the War
Department the operational units of the
disbanded OSS he reported the general
McGruder the first director of SSU and
succeeded him when general McGruder
retired a few months later in February
1946 you have a flyer for his before his
book which will tell you a lot about a
fascinating career and one of the things
in his book he mentions when he was
assigned as director of SSU he asked for
his orders and the colonel who had given
him the assignment said I don't know but
I'll tell you what your orders are you
ordered to preserve the assets of OSS
and to eliminate its liabilities it's
good clear-cut specific he did this with
great skill and leadership and is held
in the highest regard by all those who
served under him
he later commanded the 17th infantry and
the Korean War and the 7th army in
Europe next we have dr. Harry rosettes
key who's a graduate of Union College
and who earned his PhD in German
linguistics at Harvard he taught English
there and at the universities of Omaha
and Rochester before serving in the US
Army in World War two from 1944 to 1946
he was with OSS and OSS you in London
Paris and Germany he was one of the
first persons to report for duty with
CIA and he was chief of the Soviet
operations division dispatching agents
into the Soviet Union later he served in
Munich and New Delhi where he worked
against Soviet and Chinese targets since
retiring from CIA in 1970 he has written
a number of excellent books on the KGB
the Soviet Union and CIA's secret
operations and their last speaker will
be Gordon Stewart after finishing high
school in 1930 he finished in mid-year
and his parents sent him to Munich to
learn German before he went to college
that the University of Rochester the
next year and that began his connection
with Germany in 1934 after graduating
from college he retired the Germany for
a year at the University of Hamburg just
as Hitler was radically changing the
whole German world after some business
experience he began a PhD in European
history at University of Chicago just
before the second war but was drafted in
February 1941 trained as an Army
artillery officer and then assigned in
1942 to the research and analysis branch
of OSS in Washington in 1944 he went to
London where he joined Secret
Intelligence branch of OSS and then on
to Paris and eventually ending up at OSS
headquarters in Wiesbaden after the war
he stayed in SSU in Germany becoming
chief of station in March of 1947 it was
then that he became involved in the
shift of responsibility for the Gailen
organization from the US Army to CIA
which he will tell us about shortly I
should only add that before retiring in
1971 mr. Stewart also served on the
board international estimates and as
CIA's Inspector General so as you can
see from these biographies which only
touch a few high points of some very
distinguished careers this is a really
extraordinary panel and we're delighted
to have it here today and so without any
further ado let me begin with the first
speaker and ask mr. pritchfield ken
thank you very much thank you very
precise accurate description of how I
got into the intelligence business it's
also a tremendous pleasure to be here
with these gentlemen aligned on my right
who represent most of my life one way or
another in 10 minutes I can only give
you some very pointed highlights when in
1944 President Roosevelt made a decision
to assign to the Secretary of War and
the Joint Chiefs of Staff the
responsibility for the occupied areas
after the war he initially did this for
a period of six months as we all know
this went on much longer than that and
in practical terms in Germany it was as
Kent has stated a ten-year experience I
do regard the whole experience and
American intelligence in Germany after
the war as
very much of a learning period the
intelligence community was oddly led by
the command echelons of the occupation
they knew very little about intelligence
and paid very little attention to it but
the command structure was extremely
faulty and I'll touch on that in a
moment
and contributed to a decade in which we
had a essentially uncoordinated divided
intelligence community there were other
factors however when I joined CIA I
immediately noticed that there was a
deep cultural influence in CIA that was
quite different from that which I had
experienced as a very conventional
Regular Army officer bill Quinn in his
book which has been mentioned gives an
excellent analysis of his impression of
that when he was assigned to SSU at the
end of the war there was virtually no
American intelligence effort that was
focused on Germany when bill Quinn
formed SSU he this was one of the first
things that he observed so he reached
out overseas someplace and got Harry was
it see to come back to Washington and
assigned him the task of organizing the
initial SSU Soviet effort it was that
picture that I was at that time that I
entered the picture and having met dick
Elms and a few others in Europe I came
back and made an enormous decision to
leave the Regular Army and joined the
Central Intelligence Agency and take on
the task of organizing Harry resist his
first operational base overseas which
perchance was to be in Munich but as you
heard I no sooner got there spent three
or four months doing this and when very
casually I was asked to in addition to
my other duties on the north side of
Munich would I go out the south side of
Munich and take a look at an
organization in the village of cork that
was called Operation recipe about which
I knew a good deal having served in in
Germany and in Austria and how
experienced rusty agents going by in the
field without knowing anything about
where they came from or what they were
supposed to be doing
general Seibert who was the first g2 at
the end of the war was assigned to use
that the United States forces European
theater which was created in the summer
of 1945 when sheath was eliminated and
General Eisenhower became the theater
commander and as the g2 of 12th Army
Group the general Seibert immediately
became his g2 and he very effectively
exploited the power and the prestige of
General Eisenhower to quickly bring
under his own control all of the
intelligence activities of any
consequence that were going on in
Germany at the time I would exclude SS
youth from that because it was doing so
little that it did not really figure
very significantly in those early days I
can tell you that as chief the
counterintelligence branch at the
occupation or in the garden Heidelberg I
found a fella named Gordon Stewart and
another fellow named Crosby Lewis and
they used to come by my office
occasionally but not very often
and occasionally had problems but I did
not perceive that they were at that time
really a significant factor the two big
organizations in Germany that were
simply overwhelming the what we came to
call the intelligence jungle because
that's what Germany was in the first two
and a half years after the war the two
organizations were the what became to
give an organization that was being run
out of over ersal by general cyber and
about which he was extremely protective
and extremely secretive he told the Army
of Occupation which was only an hour
down the autobahn from Frankfurt
absolutely nothing about this operation
he also insisted on total control of the
only major counterintelligence core unit
in Germany at that time the 970 of CIC
and refused to share either it's the
direction of it or its product with the
commanding general of the occupation
army
when I got to park I took a good look in
a very superficial way because it it was
a casual exercise I assure you and I
found that the it was immediately
apparent that there were two things that
the Gillan organization did pretty well
there
evaluation their research and analysis
with regard to Sylvia armed forces was
very impressive and it should have done
because they were the only organization
in the world that had been operating
directly against the Soviet Union Soviet
armed forces without interruption since
the beginning of the attack of Soviet
Union in 1941 so we were getting a very
good bargain there because we did not
have in the United States and colleges
community any real competence to deal
with the Soviet Armed Forces and the
military-industrial complex the Soviet
Union which was out there waiting for us
to deal with so we got a good bargain
there I found that all of the analysts
and all of the consumers of the
intelligence Magellan organization were
positive friendly and helpful I found
all of the operators in German in
Germany including CIC military
intelligence and most of the operating
bases of CIA were just as Hospital and
non tagging istic as they could be and
so when I set it into pull Ark in 1949 I
sort of decided it was time to circle
the wagons and wait for the attacks they
all came in the course of the next five
years I would like to give you just a
little vignette 1949 you remember was
sino-soviet agreement first Soviet bomb
was tested NATO was found the German
Federal Republic was created Adenauer
became Chancellor general clay went home
John McCloy came over and became high
commissioner and last and not least the
I am the 1st of July I took over the
Galen organization
I found that we had gotten more than we
had bargained for I knew that the Galen
organisation was in fact a well-rounded
German intelligence service about which
we could not quickly make a qualitative
judgment but it was quite clear to us
that it had certain confidence and
fields in which the United States was
interested but I also found we had
something else in Pollock that nobody
had told me about after I'd been there a
short time a very quiet little gentleman
who I had met as dr. horn head of their
research and analysis staff invited me
to come by and have a glass of wine with
him one night and what he had to say was
that he who was Adolf poisoner who had
been head of the operation division of
the German General Staff - in the whole
war he quietly explained to me a very
low-key way that he and Jenny hatch
Speidel well-known German general and
general Herman firts would command first
German army at the end of the war had
been closely studying the situation
balance of power in Europe and the body
rain was that they were preparing a
position to present to a future German
government on how Germany might be
integrated in a Western alliance headed
by the United States that came as
something it was surprised to me so we
got the next year and fortunately we
went up in January and we could join J
McCloy and exhaustive briefing on this
he sent his director of intelligence Ben
shoot down we gave him the full story we
went through that and then came the
Korean War and everything changed
immediately all my problems of getting
enough money out of debt columns to do
to pay for the groceries and Porlock
ended because the the value of the UN
organizations in its product very
quickly was enhanced by the Korean War
then four days after the Korean War
started Adenauer reached out to his
state secretary a man named dr. Hans
Gupta and got in touch with Galen
we took no initial initiative we played
no role in that and then two weeks later
he reached out and got in
for they'd all poisoner and that began
the relationship with the German Federal
Republic with the Gailen organization
and out of it they got two things they
got the Bundeswehr and they got the
Bundys not rich indeed they both were
directly an outgrowth of that experience
and pull I think the other thing I would
say is that in 1950 the Soviet Union
clearly made a decision to give high
priority to penetrating the Gillan
organization and the German government
the particularly the national security
system the German government they did
that for the next three or four years
and by 1953-54 they really had the
Gillan organization and most of the new
offices in barn pretty well taped and so
they started a massive propaganda
operation that was designed to to
destroy the Gailen organization and if
they could to slow down the movement of
the German Federal Republic into the
Elad now exactly at the same time in
1952 the United States Army made a
decision that it was going to penetrate
the German organization and all of the
national security elements in bang and
whereas the Soviets did it with the
colonel Mac stop there operating out of
Dresden and later karlshorst the army
did it with a Colonel Thomas operating
out of region 3 of 66 the nine
seventieth later of 66 CIC now this went
on during all of the next five years
from 1950 to 1955 in 1954 of the United
States Army launched a major conspiracy
to destroy the game and organization and
get Chancellor Adenauer to redirect his
attention to creating German
intelligence within the German armed
forces and the new incipient Ministry of
Defense which was in the process of
developing this effort was carried out
it was a conspiracy it was the the
documents that I had on it just filled
with references to secret meetings
secret emissaries confidential meetings
that me sure you burn this letter after
you've read it why they did this remain
something of a mystery
I do not know at what point the decision
was made to penetrate the Galen
organization but it was made in about
1915 it was carried out very efficiently
by CIC the end of this story is that
when the conspiracy did not work because
Speidel
and raising replied in a very specific
way to to the overture from the g2 in
Washington that they would not play this
game so the next year as many of you
know from having read it many versions
on it general Trudeau not content with
the effort he had made he took a direct
run at the Chancellor when he was
visiting Washington in the summer of
1955 and basically made the same
arguments that have been made in the
approach to Speidel and poisoner when
that didn't work the next thing that
happened was Galen approached me in two
weeks three weeks after that and
protested vehemently about the fact that
the that the United States
counterintelligence Corps had been
systematically engaged in penetration of
his organization that was a difficult
one to handle I reported that no
response whatsoever from anybody and a
month later the principal agent of CIC
was arrested by the German police for
suspicion of working for the east side
he was taken to prison where he
immediately committed suicide and this
produced a billion so nothing as far as
I can judge that finally brought the
only g2 to cancel its operation of
penetrating a gaming organization and
the government of Chancellor Adenauer
thank you very much
[Applause]
our second speaker is the Honorable
Richard Holmes you've just heard an
entire book on the subject of the
origins the Bundeswehr and the modern
German intelligence organization you'll
never hear it any better or any more
concisely given so pay attention I'm
delighted to be here this morning with
so many old friends it's unusual to be
in my have so many people in my own
generation except at the AARP pharmacy I
wanted to talk this morning a little bit
about SSU which you've been hearing
about because I have noted that it it
and its short life have sort of
disappeared into the mists of history
when here's glancing references to it
and I can understand why they're
glancing because it existed for only a
short time but I celebrate its existence
because it saved I don't know how many
exactly case officers trained
intelligence officers to start the
Central Intelligence Agency when the
time came you've been told already that
President Truman dissolved the OSS
effective 1 October 1945 bingo just like
that what was to be done with the
hundreds of employees it had and how was
this to be handled well it sounds so
smooth that part of it was put in the
War Department part of it in the State
Department and the rest it was
liquidated the General John Magruder and
then Lieutenant Colonel William W Quinn
had the job of
doing this and I must say that in
typical Washington fashion it was the
most disorganized affair one could
possibly imagine and while they were
groaning and grunting to get the job
done the rest of Washington was trying
to find ways and means of killing the
organization of organizing American
intelligence in a different way and this
even included J Edgar Hoover who at that
time had control of Latin American
intelligence which he had had during
World War two and he was anxious to make
himself the king of worldwide
intelligence this obviously did not fly
but let's look at SSU for a moment here
is this organization called the
Strategic Services Unit of the War
Department and this is the part I'm
interested in because the analysts from
the research and analysis branch of OSS
were transferred to the State Department
and that was a relatively simple
bureaucratic matter they just picked
them up and put them over there and some
quit in some state and it's now called
INR this many years later but what was
to be done with the SSU who was going to
pay the people well that was a rather
interesting thought because the
high-minded individuals who had decided
that this intelligence and
counterintelligence unit ought to be
preserved had not make any provisions
for feeding it and Colonel Quinn had the
interesting job of going to the army and
please remember everyone that there was
no defense department in those days this
was still this the War Department and
the Navy Department to the War
Department to get some money now the OSS
which was an institution organized under
an executive order told by the president
to be paid by the JCS
but with no congressional oversight and
no particular accountability and
therefore general Donovan had built a
peace and all over the place I mean
you've what probably all read the
history of OSS if you haven't you might
do it it's an interesting lesson in the
hallowed determined creative fella can
create a lot of different institutions
some effective and some not so effective
so how does Colonel Quinn Lieutenant
Colonel Quinn get his money the army
said we don't have money to pay you the
Secretary of War said you better go to
Congress to get the money anyway if he
chooses he can tell you the exact
details of how he got the money but I
must say that it was the most
imaginative way to go about it he even
got the general officer who was in
charge of Army Finance to take him by
the hand to a congressional committee
and while he was in front of that
committee one afternoon he persuaded the
Chairman to give him the necessary money
to finance the SSU Quinn's other great
achievement and I'm talking about him I
know he's sitting here but I'm talking
about him because I think he'd be
reluctant to say these things himself he
discovered that he was having a really
being given a bad time by the FBI
because mr. Hoover had the impression as
did a certain columnist in Washington
and after all they were agitating this
in the newspaper that the SSU was
nothing but a bunch of commies that was
left over from the war and therefore not
to be trusted and when they were sending
out what might have been considered by
most feel good intelligence reports the
Army and the Navy were disregarding them
because they felt they were probably
disinformation or double agents work or
things of this kind and I know we had a
sort of a little talk about this inside
the SSU and Colonel Quinton realized it
was only one way to get at this
problem that was to go see mr. Hoover
now most of you have been in the
Washington bureaucracy in one way or
another and you can imagine the standing
of a Lieutenant Colonel United States
Army taking on that monolith say Edgar
Hoover but down he went and he looked
mr. Hoover right in the eye and said I
get the impression that you don't think
that my organization is a proper one
from a security standpoint I'll make an
arrangement with you I'll give you the
names of my principal officers worldwide
you get together with my security
officer and anybody and one of your
assistant directors look into the
backgrounds of all these people and see
where you come out well a couple of
months later mr. Hoover called him up
and said you know this is a real relief
I can't find any trouble with your
organization except for one rather minor
employee who had been seeing somebody
from the Soviet embassy bingo then
Colonel Quinn was in a position to be
able to go to the Army and the Navy and
say oh so you think I've got a bunch of
commies over there
call up J Edgar Hoover and he'll tell
you what we've got over there now this
seems so minor these days but it was so
important those days because if we
hadn't been able to keep this group
together you never would have gotten the
CIA started with the JumpStart in the in
Asia and in Germany and granted but they
may not have made the greatest cooze the
world has ever seen but on the other
hand don't forget this was in the period
quite some years before overhead
reconnaissance began to tell us what was
going on in the Soviet Union and we had
to count on agents and all kinds of
various devices to try and find out
principally defectors but we had trained
intelligence officers who had been
nurtured in the SS you had been passed
along to the cij when General Vandenberg
took over and gradually increased in
size when the Korean War came along
now one other aspect of this affair you
heard just now from mr. McDonald the
business about OSL which was the office
of special operations which is nothing
but SS you transferred the CIA but you
also heard about the office of policy
coordination now how would you feel if
you were in charge of an organization
like CIA or any other organization and
they were told by your betters in the
government that you were going to be
given a whole new outfit which was going
to have be paid by you fed by you housed
by you but you had no policy control
over its operations whatever that was
going to be handled elsewhere by the
Secretary of State and Secretary of War
and so forth this is what was visited on
Admiral Hill and Carter in those days so
here we had two competing organizations
one doing intelligence and
counterintelligence the other one doing
covert action operations and for a
period of two or three years there they
were out in the world competing with
each other now of all the nonsense that
could possibly have been created that
was standard terrible and general Smith
when he came in and those of you who
ever served with general Smith's no this
was not a man who took things lightly
did his very best to see if he could
keep this thing operating that way and
discovered after two or three years it
was his best efforts nothing was
happening that was really getting this
job done in his eyes properly so one day
he decided to merge the two
organizations into what became known as
the clandestine services of CIA and on
top of that took all this policy
business away from the other parts of
the government and took it on his
shoulders with the advice of an advisory
committee on covert action
these details probably sound very boring
to you but I can only say that they were
very important in what eventually grew
out after the Korean War and the Cold
War
analysts and the stable organization
which was able in to assist and their
major assistance in overhead
reconnaissance and obviously all this is
not nearly as dramatic as what was done
when those airplanes and satellites
started to fly in Russia and over the
Soviet Union and we finally began to
understand exactly how many weapons they
had of what's kind and what order and so
forth one footnote to history I don't
think anybody forgets who ever served
with President Nixon that he felt he was
cheated out of the 1960 election by
President Kennedy because Allen Dulles
had fed the Stuart Symington information
that indicated that there was a missile
gap between the Soviet Union in the
United States
Nixon felt that he lost the election on
that and he disliked CIA from that time
to his death but that's not the era
we're talking about we're talking about
a different era but I like in closing to
read to you an extract from a speech the
President Truman made in November of
1952 just as he was leaving office he
says it was my privilege a few days ago
to brief the general who was going to
take over the office on the 20th day of
January that was this way of referring
to President Eisenhower and he was
rather appalled at all that the
president needs to know in order to
reach decisions even domestic decisions
he must know exactly what is implied by
what he does the president makes a
decision every day that can affect
anywhere from 100 million to a
they have people it is a tremendous
responsibility and I don't think many of
you realized the position in which this
great country is in this day and age we
are at the top and the leader of the
free world saying that we did not
anticipate something that we did not
want but something that has been forced
upon us and then the remainder of the
speech he gives credit to the CIA for
its intelligence work and for
coordinating the intelligence of the
rest of the government little did you
know what was coming afterwards thank
you our next speaker is mr. David Murphy
although as you heard earlier I spent
from 1950 in to 1961 in Germany I
thought it was appropriate given the
illustrious panel to talk about the fact
that Soviet operations did not only
begin in Germany but in virtue of the
fact that the Soviet Union extends from
the Sea of Japan to the Baltic Sea I
talked a little bit about my own
experiences in the Far East all of which
had an impact on and reverberations in
subsequent operations in Germany now I
was not in OSS in fact I never would
have heard of intelligence if it hadn't
been for a mistake by the army I'd been
accepted for an advanced French course
at UCLA but the army screwed up the
orders quite normally and I ended up at
Berkeley or I had a chance of studying
Chinese Italian or Russian I chose the
latter
after that experience I ended up in
Germany with a liaison team working with
the Red Army and spent from roughly June
to December in the in East Germany with
the Soviet forces after I returned to
graduate school I had heard of a an
offer which being made by the State
Department to recruit officers for the
u.s. USSR Joint Commission in Korea well
my faculty advisors like Joseph Turner
and Ray sonntag said you must accept
you've a leave of absence because you
have an opportunity to compare Soviet
policy of occupation in Germany and in
Korea well I did when I got to Seoul I
found that the Joint Commission was
totally inactive they were doing nothing
so I got a job as an analyst with the
North Korean section of the g2 for US
forces in Korea but it wasn't long
before I was approached by an individual
who claimed he represented something
called C IG he was Jim Kellis and I
found out later that Jim Callas had made
quite a name for himself blowing up
bridges in Greece in OSS during the war
and I wondered what he was doing in in
Korea well as I discovered later it
turned out that all during world war ii
general Willoughby who was the g2
MacArthur's Far East Command had been
successful in keeping OSS out of the Far
East Command area when the war ended he
relented a bit and allowed two officers
to senior liaison officers to come to
with far-east
one who's Jim Callas in Seoul and the
other was Bob Delaney in Tokyo I by
February of 74 after having several
discussions with these people I ended up
signed up with C IG in February but I
stayed in the g2 section continuing to
work four of them and with them now the
reason that it turned out although he
never admitted it but kelas was
interested in me he was because of the
work that I was doing with g2 at that
time we were still we still had the 38th
parallel and not the little squiggly
line that exists in Korea today and
whenever a word would come into the g2
section from the border that there was a
Soviet border crosser I would get in the
liaison plane on these little flimsy
outfits and fly up to the border area
and the pilot would land on the nearest
road and I would talk to whomever they
had in custody most of these guys were
either pretty drunk or they had just
lost their way and what had you and so
they were escorted back across the
border but that experience gave me a
chance to indulge in what had become
sort of a personal fascination that was
Soviet military documentation their ID
cards their travel orders and all that
sort of thing and particularly the seals
that they used because the seals gave me
the clue the unit identification I've
become fascinated with this when I was
with the Red Army in Germany and we used
to send this stuff back to to Washington
and I never realized why we never got
any replies I found out later that there
was one very charming lady
who was the entire Soviet documentation
specialist for SSU c IG at the time she
was great the only one we did we did
have a few serious defectors or what I
remember was a Soviet Air Force major
who was from the Tchaikovsky Air
engineering Academy in Moscow and he had
come out to the Far East to inspect the
ninth air army he's trying to identify
the reason behind the numerous crashes
that have occurred and he finally came
to the conclusion that it was
essentially pilot malnutrition that was
the cause don't forget this is in early
47 1947 so when he got to had you which
is an airfield right on the old 38th
parallel
he put his his documents and his trip
report in a hot water bottle and swam
across the bay to the American side C IG
was very interested in him I assure you
now another case was a young Soviet
soldier who was from a unit right on the
parallel guarding the parallel and his
he was obviously determined to defect
there was no question about it his he
had travel orders which directed him to
report to his regimental headquarters
from where they would make up a group of
people who would then be sent back to
the Soviet Union for their time was up
the service in Korea was over but it it
looked to us as though this ice age it
looked at Calais I was coached by
Keller's on this one that hit this would
be an excellent prospect for a real
inside penetration our hope was we could
get him to go back and serve for a while
at his unit and thereby answer all kinds
of questions we had on the Soviet forces
in North Korea now let me emphasize
something that I'm sure others will say
we didn't have any overhead we had no
effective
sigit at the time on Soviet forces in
North Korea we didn't have a clue
general Willoughby's Far East command
carried three hundred and sixty-five
thousand troops in North Korea where
they would have put them I don't know
but that's what that was
the order of battle was so we we hoped
that we could get this guy to go back
and stay in place a wonderful expression
but it wouldn't work because it was too
late he was he would have he would have
been reported late and so we decided
that we would try a gimmick by giving
him new travel orders and have him
simply inserted into the rail line
running east-west up to once on our West
East in this case and simply travel
along as a soldier on travel orders and
we train them a bit in elicitation well
it turned out this guy was a genius at
it he could engage these people in
conversation on these train compartments
and they would spill their unit
designation where they came from how
long they'd been there and within a very
short time in a very short time we were
able to convince this guy to go in and
he'd and carry out this kind of task
well what about travel orders it turned
out that at that time the Soviets would
use local paper Japanese paper to write
out the travel orders themselves they
were not there were no printed forms of
that kind at that in those days so I
found some paper up in the office of the
Japanese hotel manager at that time g2
section was in the bottle hotel
I had the seal for his unit copied by a
local chap maker down in the bazaar in
Seoul and I used my own very shaky
Russian scroll to write out the the
travel order stamped it with this chop
and off he went he came back and he had
all kinds of information for us that we
had just there was no other way to get
it bear in mind that all we knew about
the Soviet forces in North Korea came
from Japanese were Patriots or from
Korean refugees and their approach to
how many soldiers were in a town would
be on all [ __ ] Pathan and that was the
way it went after these after several of
these these trips during the summer of
47th
we were able to put together the
complete order of battle of the Soviet
Army in North Korea they had all of two
divisions one was an old Far East and by
the 40th Rifle Division and they were
strung out along the 40th parallel and
up once on Hunnam Chongjin along the Sea
of Japan coastal frontier as a reserve
unit they had 1/10 the mechanized
division in pin yang and we we put this
- fantastic degree of analysis looked at
every possible conceivable way they
could have had other forces we could
find no others so when we added it all
up the most we could find was a hundred
and twenty-five thousand troops in North
Korea and that was a bit of an
exaggeration so this was put together in
a report was sent published by G to US
forces and then it was sent by CI G to
Washington Washington got it was
disseminated there it's suddenly a sound
of enormous fury came out of Tokyo the
Daiichi building must have quaked when
this happened because we were
immediately told that we had to send the
team to Tokyo and explained the general
willoughby what had happened well there
I went along I remember with a very nice
young lieutenant colonel a very amiable
chap who knew nothing about intelligence
and we were ushered into the presence of
the great man and he seated his desk he
stood up but he was very tall imposing
man very Russian bearing and he fixed me
with a steely glare and he said young
man are you from CI G he took his
glasses off and he flung them across the
room now I learned from other guys since
that was a that was a standard trick of
his
I don't I don't remember what the what
the explanation finally was rather we
gave it to him or not but that was that
was the end of that but I would like to
only say that in amplification of what
many people have talked about at the in
the various sessions that I've heard in
this marvelous conference that
intelligences and very operations aren't
very useful unless they produce
intelligence that has an impact and that
was the impact of this hundred and
twenty-five thousand order of battle
which enabled us later to realize that
the Soviets could as they did in 1948 a
year later withdraw practically
overnight and they did they withdrew
from Korea in 1948 and we didn't pull
out 249 well
I returned back in March and went and
returned to the Far East in in June and
I worked on a couple of projects which
had again impact later one of the things
we we discovered after about a year
looking for the man was the head of the
quondam army the Japanese Kwantung army
that had betted Manchuria it had had
years of work against the Soviets he was
the head of their documentation section
and they were the only ones who could
turn out really first-class
reproductions of the Soviet internal
passport we finally found him after
talking to hundreds and hundreds of POWs
he was running a store in in sanju Kuo
district of Tokyo selling Christmas
cards to the occupation forces but that
was a very great break for us because we
eventually were able to use these
documents later another thing we did was
a detailed study of Soviet internal
residence controls and passport
regulations by talking to the repay
Trias from southern Sakhalin which was
totally Soviet eyes and therefore all of
the systems they used for controlling
the movement of civilians were used
against Japanese or with Japanese
civilians in in southern Sakhalin I
in 1949 in the fall of 49 there was
considerable as we say controversy in
Washington over who should run Soviet
operations should there be a Soviet
division or not and so I was sent I
think I never could figure out then
whether it was a cabal or not but I was
sent around the world visiting various
cities on the Soviet periphery to
determine what the potential was for
Soviet operations and to determine
whether or not there really had to be a
single focus on Soviet operations around
the world given the fact that that
you're dealing with a unitary target a
single target Soviet Union it was in
Germany though I ran into a number of
these people and that's the end of the
story this is such fascinating stuff I
can't stop anyway my next week here is
somebody you've just heard from Bester
Helms Lieutenant General William Quinn
first guys like to thank him best Helms
for making my talk for me matter of fact
I think he did it a lot better than I I
have very little to do with the Soviet
intelligence I am proud of one thing and
I'll read it to you but from my book and
the reason I'm going to do that is
because I think Tommy I'm getting a
little Alzheimer's and I'd rather read
what I said once before so I will
contradict myself today around the turn
of 46 after the gentleman McGruder
retired I had some thoughts about what
are we going to do about our buddies and
Soviets we have a great friends at that
time as you recall after they up until
about that time also I was had rumors
that some of the the Soviet troops had
taken some of American prisoners from
German camps that they had overrun and
for what reasons I wouldn't know why
they so it took these people there's
also reports from Mexico that the
Soviets were operating against our
offices and forces and headquarters in
London so I thought well let me find out
what we have in the country here in
connection with with a bank on
intelligence intelligence operations
and so I got the feeling somewhere and
that's what I just said
along the line that we ought to get all
the information we could on them
I found that SSU had no depository and
no bank of military or economic
intelligence and courage from OSS and
that for a matter of excited other
anything avoided really existed in the
United States government from the
standpoint of a large Bank of it tells
us as it Soviets had been the Companions
and otherwise partners and in conflict
we hadn't gone through the drill of
collecting information on them this
bothered me because no other agency in
the government had anything on the
Soviet notes are on their installations
of a strategic interest the FBI of
course had understand point of internal
security had some information on Soviet
intelligence services but nothing are
very little on the military the State
Department of course had their
information in connection with the
diplomats consequently I began to look
around to see who we could get to
organize and run what I might call the
Soviet for the Russian section in OSS
director said few a division which would
collate not only collect but kohli to a
degree intelligence collected on the
Soviet Union the section would however
issue requirements to the collection
agencies regarding Soviet military the
KGB and collaterally political and
Information and economic intelligence I
asked bill Sharpe who had to be my chief
of staff at that time and explained the
problem that bill sort said let me let
me go find out what I can find out from
he was then a major in the army and I I
outlined of course my concern he said
let me get together with Doyle and
Thurston and see what we can come up
with
bill Doyle that insertion of course work
with us at sign and former FBI agents
later they came in and said that we got
a candidate his name is Harry Brzezinski
he's in Europe on an assignment at the
moment but he's very able intelligence
officer and he might be just the person
you're looking for I said well let's see
if he will accept the transfer and set
up an office here in Washington
well Harry came in and had I sat down
and agreed and so he was returned as as
humid quarters and started the Russian
session when he reported to me we sat
down and had a long talk but where we
were going and what to do and what was
the purpose of the exercise we build a
bank of information on the Soviet Union
particularly on the military
establishment the KGB the GRU and
related threat capabilities so he sent
off the work and does not sign job and
most everybody in the business
applauds his work so consequently the
star witness here is Harry resist key
and that tells you just how about how
smart I was
[Applause]
well its proper to follow that with our
next speaker who is dr. Harry resist key
well there's one cardinal fact about the
history of our intelligence it's the
fact that 1946 over 47 this country of
ours was totally ignorant ignorant and
every conceivable way what had been
going on and what was going on inside
the Soviet Union and gradually inside
Eastern Europe the Air Force had to send
a lot of junior officers to the Library
of Congress to get what was available
very basic items and a bombing target
dossier we had and I spent six months
looking at it captured German and
Japanese documents we had gradually as
Jim Chris chiozza pointed out he
accumulated not two old tables of
organization accumulated by German
intelligence now against that ignorance
in forty six and seven whose g2
estimated that the Soviet occupation
forces in Eastern Europe will greater
that was required to maintain the
occupation
next the preparations for the Berlin
Blockade were for time immediately
interpreted as preparation for movement
of land troops West I remember some of
the wonderful charts we had of what
Soviet units in the East would get to
what parts of Western Europe
i think the best guess was two months to
the english channel
third korea however unofficial there was
no question in the minds of many
generals and intelligence personnel in
washington that the korean offensive was
a side effort
a diversion flawless to come european
land war the requirement was simple he
was the soviet union a black hole not
just a mildly denied area but a black
hole of no information at all what the
Pentagon wanted was early warning they
anticipated Soviet both air and military
action and they wanted us to supply
early warning not basic intelligence not
a description of Soviet forces but of
the beginning of action it became a once
clear to us and here's where our little
band of Soviet operations officer began
to form that there was no conceivable
way of taking ages with a suitcase
my radio and walking across two or three
borders to get to any place and just
something good so the immediate
requirement was obviously air dispatch
and I still remember the day when I went
over to general cable authorized by our
director to say we would like to have
the air force's cooperation in Germany
to dispatch our agents into the Soviet
Union we had our own two aircraft we had
Hungarian and Czech teams but we needed
ground maintenance weather etc from 49
to 53 with a fairly large number of
agents dispatched to various parts of
the Soviet Union there was some land
operations one obviously was the one
from Korea we sent a man in from your
Andrew pick up a vial of water
downstream from us a suspect chemical
plant but the crucial part of all this
was obviously the case sauce the men to
do the work we had officers born in
Russia we had officers who were 2 years
old when they came from the Ukraine this
search and this is where the army helped
a good deal and certainly some of our
best men were trained by the Army and
Russian but we needed Lithuanian
speakers Latvian speakers Ukrainian
speakers these men gradually for the
most part
congregated in the Munich area where we
had the safe houses
to do the training of the agents most of
them recruited in Western Europe
what we wanted obviously was young men
who had been recently in the Soviet
Union whether come back with the Germans
or whether defectives from East Germany
and when men who were willing to take on
what was they perfectly clear to them a
one-in-ten chance of survival they K we
selected them
I once estimated it was four to five
thousand man-hours of chaos and
technician time to get one team ready to
go into the Soviet Union who sure
problem was the one Dave who's talked
about to actually prepare men to be a
resident to survive in the so Union
required a legend of the first order but
almost perfect documentation in those
first three four years I think CIA
developed a technical capacity that
probably exceeded that of most criminal
organizations he was a complex operation
it was a time-consuming operation and it
for the most part failed but it was an
operation it had to be done at the time
it was the only thing that an igon
wanted it was the one thing the director
instructed us to do
we stopped in 53 when things opened up a
little bit and people could walk around
Moscow where diggers thought reading
provision newspapers where they could
take trips even though they were
accompanied all the way to that extent
then this was no longer necessary and I
will remember the day when I talked to a
droll Helen cutter about terminating
these operations we agreed they had
provided small profit for those radios
that came up and had nothing to report
obviously provided rather important
negative information on Soviet
intentions he had another remark to make
which I think he really meant this has
been good practice to the next war and
those are you old enough no that is what
we did anticipate in the late 40s and
early 50s one profit that is indelible I
think is that we represented a forward
arm of the Air Force that we are planes
tested ground reactions to overhead
fight they raid odds the radar they
watched as the ground reactions as a
c-47s flew over they never got
I need their to two targets two angles
for the historian one its role in the
Cold War or installing it it will offend
the diplomatic historians to know that
these operations into the Soviet Union
were never cleared with the State
Department I assume our director cleared
them with the president and he will also
note that there were no diplomatic
protests from the Russians probably they
would not protest as they did not later
against the u2 flights because they
would not want to admit that they were
unable to protect their territory from
overhead bombing
it's also a time when we can read with
the documents than men now available how
did the Russians react to these growths
violations of their territory they knew
enough about the coastal across the
border air surveillance but here deep
into the Ukraine southern Ukraine flight
after flight into the Baltic States and
never a word from them so to get the
other side of the beginnings of the Cold
War straight
I think the historian can and should
take a look at exactly what the Soviet
notes re and Twitter reaction was to
these flights of laws and finally a what
if every historian likes to what if what
if Pia Pappas knows had been longer an
appalling a little taller what about
we were talking said I'll cabin and I
after he had sent his telegram off if
only we had an aircraft with a camera
that could simply file but Sylvia
territory
how much cheaper in one day it could do
for fifty agents could not keep up with
and still have to report and expose
themselves what if the u2 more
elementary version and the high-speed
cameras have been available in 46 47 48
and we could have surveyed every piece a
Soviet territory and determined what the
ground situation was literally
industrially transportation etc with the
Cold War has started then would it have
been pursued as actively as it was then
by both sides it's the topic we're
talking about it's something you've been
liven up your engine your your last
chapter with what if
[Music]
and the last speaker for the panel is
mr. Gordon Stewart
let me add a little note to Harry's talk
the flights were organized by Millard
Lewis who is the a to of the air force
at that time great cooperation from
those fellows and one of them the
Hungarians were picked up on radar
coming back they flew over Budapest and
circled it and then came in a little
sentimental sentimental bit let me
quickly talk about the German station we
had a headquarters in Karlsruhe at that
time our Berlin base was by far the most
important base we had we had a base in
Munich and then we had the liaison
outfit with the Gailen organization the
Berlin base undertook a an extraordinary
operation and that is tunneling into
East Germany to tap their land lines
both voice and code the tunnel was built
we got this stuff we analyzed it for a
year the Russians then dug it up they
had known about it from the very
beginning I knew that nothing of any
importance would be coming over it
we tied up dozens and dozens of analysts
in London the British did did the voice
we did the code and they finally closed
it
well the munich-based then of course we
had the BND liaison we had two outfits
working on czechoslovakia one was headed
by our people the other by a Czech
general mortgage and then we had a few
little bases in in Germany right around
Germany I think we had an extraordinary
group of people the Germans by removing
Jews from Germany equipped us with men
who had not only language but a deep
understanding of the German character I
would name for example Peter satchel as
one of the most manipulative people that
I have ever known
he could just get anybody to do anything
and we had others who were not quite not
quite as good as he was some really
quite interesting a fellow named sig
hawkster who is a scientist and very
useful in getting certain information
we worked on secret intelligence and
counterintelligence strictly our
targeting was military units in the
Soviet zone and occasionally economic
intelligence there is a little outfit
was making fine nickel wire screening
which was used in atomic in the
development of atomic materials and we
went in and persuaded all of these
people to defect at one time we offered
them a lot of money and out they came
we disseminate our reports in Germany to
the Army and Air Force we had a very
good support organization we could take
agents who had been blown and settled
them in West Germany
we got houses for them we had a little
Furniture Factory using the crating that
was used to ship personal goods overseas
we made beds chairs desks and so on
because the housing we got was usually
stripped of stuff and that was a
continuing operation we had a group that
we called agent settlement people East
Germans who had been blown and came to
the West we would try to get them into
positions give get them into houses
furnish the houses into positions where
they could again enter the economy and
make money usually working out very well
we had a technical services organization
they could create false papers and do
various nice little jobs like that I had
one time when I was in Bonn I think it
was the Swedish embassy had a safe that
they couldn't open and so I asked our
fellows to come up and they opened it in
two and a half hours and I said well
that was really great and they said well
actually we got it open about an hour
and fifteen minutes but we didn't want
to think it was that bad we had a superb
communications organization
we had excellent support from the Army
and Air Force just about anything we
wanted
Jim Crutchfield has mentioned in a sense
that they were competitive and difficult
but very often all we needed to do was
ask and we got what we wanted from them
the merger with OPC occurred just in as
I was leaving in 1953 Beetle Smith sent
Lucien Tresca Dodd to Frankfurt and Mike
Burke who was head of the OPC
organization and I were supposed to put
our two organizations together of course
that didn't work at first there are
people were there people are people were
are people but in the long run the the
station was merged when I want to went
out again in 64 it was a perfectly fine
merged station working very well
[Applause]
whether those are splendid presentations
from all six and now we have some time
for discussion and questions but before
I ask for questions I would like to ask
panelists having all now hurt each other
if any of them wanted to make any
comments on what their colleagues have
said because as you can see this they
were working in the same area anybody
have any post grips all right floor is
open for questions sir this is for dr.
resistive I have read that in addition
to the intelligence operations that you
were talking about there was another
angle to our operations in the area
which was to provide support operational
support weapons things like that for the
nationalist groups that were still
fighting in the field against the
Soviets and I also understand for some
kodoroff German units that we're still
wandering around would you comment on
that place what was the specific point
though we I have heard that we were
providing operational support in the
post-war period to nationalist groups
that were fighting the Soviets and some
nationalist groups in Ukraine Ukrainians
by low Russians the Baltic States
and also to some cut-off German units
that we're still wandering around in a
region first off was it true and would
you comment on it we continued
communications with and giving support
to the Ukrainian partisans as long as we
could maintain contact and at a certain
point I can't me the exact date here
they'd been living and working in the
Carpathian Mountains all these years
Starlin could have wiped them out
overnight was one call but again I
gather he couldn't let his people know
that he had an insurrection inside so
there that dissipated by itself the
people were crowded up and gradually
moved into towns beyond that in terms of
military support the only thing I know
about well at least the promise of
certain military or armed support
to the wind organization in Poland
sometime later which turned out to be in
the long run under polish intelligence
control University of Cincinnati other
question I think for maybe Jim
Crutchfield can answer this in 1952 the
military attache in Moscow had his diary
compromised by some Soviet agent first
published in East German press
eventually at Bolshevik this gentleman
was eventually court-martialed
however the CI a case worker was
involved in this incident and presented
a counter propaganda paper which was
rejected by the chief of staff my
question is was this a problem of
Paulette when you present a policy
statement to another government agency
is this a constant problem with the CIA
and Department of the army is anybody
familiar with that incident it hit the
Washington Post on the front page in
March 6th of 1952 and it was a national
issue I'm not familiar with that case I
was in still in Germany at the time and
I have no recollection of it whatsoever
chance since it was a incident occurred
Germany in the Soviet Union I don't know
I just don't I can't focus on that at
all I have no recollection apologize for
the tough question the diary in question
was indeed photographed by the KGB
second chief Directorate American
Department
it was then doctored enhanced and then
publicized I'm not sure that I have any
information on the counter
counter-attack invention was a document
which we got from the CIA which there
was a paper policy paper which was
presented to the army staff it was an
excellent pay policy paper on how to
deal with this issue how
ever the Department of the army Maxwell
detailer specifically nixed the whole
thing and hindsight looking at it it
would have been an excellent move if
they would execute the CIA's counter
propaganda effort and I was hoping
someone would have you know do something
about that
I'd like to ask Courtney Stewart a
question about the tunnel the value of
the tunnels if you could expand on that
John Randall on his book talks about the
fact that we were able to decode some of
the cable traffic we did not tell the
British about this and the Soviets
assumed we were not doing it that helped
them perhaps decide to let the thing run
for a year to protect George Blake the
penetration of my house but was the it
was the take from that decoding that
cable traffic of any value at all in
terms of so at least Soviets order of
battle information at the time well the
Army on the order of battle information
interesting basically it confirmed what
they had I remember Allen Dulles used to
say are there any nuggets had to say no
no no gets today significant in itself
army wives discussion of social
arrangements idiotic stuff
everybody else on the panel want to come
in on the tunnel and that's that's three
day well I I think the there are a
number of aspects of this in the first
place it is untrue that we were decoding
Soviet traffic and not telling the
British about it because the British
were in on this from the very beginning
all of the traffic was known to them all
of the techniques for D mocking or
demodulating the teletype traffic was
all well known to them as far as the sum
of the data ends for one aspect of your
question we took the not there was I'd
like to make clear there was no coded
material the material that we got from
teletype was done in Washington and it
involved a complex simply modulate the
modulating the televi teletype signal
coming over telephone wires there was
some super incitement in which before
you typed your message you ran it
through a a code system but that was
very there was very little of that now
the bulk of the material in the military
field is it is untrue unfortunately I
mean I have to have sighted a lot of
this very recently and consequently it's
normally my Alzheimer's would not permit
me to say this but it is also true to
say that the military intelligence at
the time the tunnel was operating not
only helped to verify the data we
already had but it came at a time when
despite what we may like to think back
on our cross border operations into the
East Germany whether they were Galen
operations or our own operations had all
but ceased to exist by that time Stasi
the East German service was so effective
that we weren't running things so we
couldn't send chaps
the Leipzig to see if the good ol 65th
armored division was still there
but this did give us a lot but I think
the most fascinating aspect of this
whole thing is that when the KGB got the
material from George Blake they knew
that their own first chief Directorate
that is the Foreign Intelligence Service
they knew their traffic was in violet it
would never be sent over these
relatively low level of security lines
they were landlines so they didn't think
they had much they hung everybody else
out to dry they have now GRU their own
third chief directed military
counterintelligence they hung be the
military totally and for example I know
there was a lot of family chatter and
back chat that didn't seem to be very
valuable but but it gave us for example
the first insights into the 20th Party
Congress and what the reverberations
were in high levels of Soviet military
to the anti-stalinist themes of that of
that speech of that session so it one
has to constantly be back and in the
timeframe of 1955-56 to understand what
the value was that is I think my own
personal view I will expanded on that in
my my opus d'Arthur I'd like to ask if
any of the members the panel would
comment on the so called operations
winter factor the report or allegation
that the agency had used its asset
Joseph Scott Lowe in Warsaw to build a
story based on Knoll fields wartime
contacts with mr. Dulles barren station
to build up the idea that Knoll field
and his many high-ranking East European
communist contacts from the wartime and
immediate post-war period had supposedly
been American agents and that this
contribute
greatly to the major communist purges of
East European leadership's in the period
1949 to 52 could anyone comment on the
extent to which we did mount such an
operation if we did aspect of that and a
woman named Erica glazier who had come
up from Switzerland and was part of oh s
s in Wiesbaden said that she felt that
she should return and biack German
citizen again
she went to Berlin and was asked to go
and see a lawyer in East Berlin and was
picked up and interrogated I think in
prison sentenced to death and held for a
long long time and then when Khrushchev
came in
Erica Glaser finally came out again she
married and lived lives somewhere around
Washington one of my closest friends
having worked together in or outside the
communist party she actually turned out
to be after four years in prison and in
camp a very competent affable hostess
known in and around Warrenton but during
the first year when the vice president
of the American Security Bank brought
her home to Warrenton there were a
handful of people who would not speak to
her who would not go to a dinner party
where she would be invited but in the
long run she turned out to be one of the
most interesting people for what I call
the
establishment in the county which had
very little to do with left-wing
politics her comment on her or comment
on her new home early on was politics no
politics in America you're either for
the government or against the government
now you have to think very hard to reach
those positions and of course down there
they were mostly Republicans so they
were against the government I would only
add I would only add to that did I
discuss this whole case at length with
with a retired colonel Wallach about six
months ago and it would only contribute
to what Harry has said and he did not
seem to feel that there were any really
serious loose ends historically on his
wife's case at all I was the implication
of your statement question was that
somehow CIA had been in touch with
Joseph Scott law when he was in the you
be in Poland in 1948-49 when the basic
preparation was made for these 1949
trials is that am i correct that's the
implication right he's fascinating
my name is Brooks Cleaver retired
chemicals chemical the senator military
history one of you gentlemen and forgive
me I'm not sure which mentioned about
the Russians extracting American
prisoners of war from German camps and
could you expand on that
I can't expand
jeetu of the Seventh Army another gentle
patch why we were over running an awful
lot of camps and I got several reports
back that those camps of Germans that we
over ran that had Americans in them had
also been overrun previously by the
Soviets and according to the rumor I had
no specific identifications of
individuals taken but in my memory I
recall vaguely that this was the case
and the Germans were saying that there
were specific types of merchants that
would say didn't identify and so I just
had that in the back of my mind when I
decided we had to do something about
Soviet intelligence and that was one of
the things that I thought about all
slowly Soviet operations against us in
London but I can't verify it
do Marshall join mj2 in the spring of
1953 President Eisenhower signed a
national security directive 143 the
volunteer freedom Corps could any of the
gentlemen on the panel comment as to CIA
support to this effort to organize the
East European escapees and M agrees into
paramilitary units possibly to be used
behind the Iron Curtain
any takers
pretty much
sir
I'm Larin Schmitz uh CIA retired and I
only have a few comments to offer not
necessarily a question but there hasn't
been very much mentioned about the
magnitude of the Soviet bloc espionage
against West Germany and just a few
facts and figures might be of some
interest to some of the people in the
audience the great bulk they really
heavy effort of the Soviet bloc against
West Germany probably got into full gear
sometime after 54 so when like comments
actually go into the period subsequent
to 54 but according to figures compiled
by the German internal service the vfe
which is with which I had extensive
dealings in a period of about 1957 to
1964 I could simply mention that in a
fairly typical year there were about
3,000 hostile agents exposed in West
Germany in a single year and most of
these were people who had been recruited
and inserted into the refugee channel
from East Germany and most of them gave
a full report upon what had happened
when they were debriefed in the refugee
centers however in a fairly typical year
well I should go on well in a fairly
typical year there were about 350
hostile agents convicted in the German
courts of these about say roughly in a
typical year 87 percent or East German
primarily em FS hva the principle East
German service let's say of the
remaining 13 percent about 8 percent
we're Soviet and the other 5% were from
the other block services now that
doesn't mean that the polls and the
checks were successful against West
Germany and they had some fairly
high-level agents but the bulk over East
German the Soviets were very active and
besides West German targets the American
Embassy in Bonn and the American
military were also heavily targeted by
the eastern services so I just thought
that might be analytically particularly
the product of Harry Rosinski and Gordon
Stewart Stewart mentioned the plant in
East Germany producing nickel wire mesh
that was for the Soviet gaseous
diffusion project as a barrier a nickel
wire mesh is a very primitive barrier
they put nickel powder on it and
sintered it to provide very small holes
well Gordon provided samples of this
barrier to the Atomic Energy Commission
through the CIA and we tried to figure
out what the Soviet barrier was and we
did create a barrier which by that time
was not as good as ours
I happen to be the patent holder on the
secret Soviet barrier
still-secret I think now Harry provided
lots of information the most memorable
one was a Soviet colonel whom Harry
mentions in one of his books defected
connected with the uranium operations
you don't mention him by name he was
brought over and put into a safe house
in Northwest Washington and a CIA man
and I practically lived with this
gentleman we weren't getting much out of
him until July 4th I believe 1951 a lot
of firecrackers he said he wanted to
become an American citizen and I will
give you the biggest Soviet atomic
secret and he did I won't tell you what
it was and eventually he was released to
Harry's good hands I don't know what
happened you certainly know and there
were other episodes I want my job he's
got a good job ok Russell Baer
University of Graz in Austria this panel
is on American intelligence in Central
Europe Austria is part of that I would
like to ask the question how important
were the operations in Austria in your
opinion were they were they important in
46 47 and there was after all a
tunneling project in Vienna before the
one boy was one in Berlin was that
different from operation girl in Berlin
thank you
tap in Austria didn't involve a tunnel I
don't know exactly what it was but it
was a very excellent operation and
that's the reason we got into it a
general assent on the earlier years from
46 47 48 when the when use FET in
Frankfurt was closed out and the
structure of the occupation of Germany
was dramatically revised General Mark
Clark was retired in in Vienna and he
was replaced by Lieutenant General
Geoffrey Keyes who moved from command of
the Army headquarters in Heidelberg the
occupation army he moved down to Vienna
he took his entire g2 section with him
of which I was a member after arriving
he and his g2 reappraised the
experiences they had had in Germany and
45 46 47 being totally shut out by
general Seibert and his establishment up
in Frankfurt and frustrated that they
had the responsibility for theirs
security of the area and had no control
whatsoever only the only major
counterintelligence core unit and also
they were generally concerned that that
there had been a great deal of
competition and rivalry within Germany
so when we arrived in Austria general
Keys decided he would be innovative and
form an entirely centralised
intelligence organizations rather
experimental I had the good fortune to
to be the the staff officer who was
given essentially the role of a small
DCI in Austria for 12 months we combined
counterintelligence intelligence
military intelligence the four xxx CIC
and had something close to total
cooperation from the CIA stationed there
and other members of the embassy
including Eleanor dollars who was deep
into economic intelligence so we had
what I would
a marvelous year in Austria and I think
that we were credited with producing you
know some of the best intelligence that
was produced worldwide among other
things we took Soviet defectors out of
Vienna on a regular basis during the
year that I was there we took 40 Soviet
defectors 35 to 40 and with no policy
from Washington and all we had to
arrange our own resettlement in Germany
there had been something called the
McNerney Sokolowski Agreement that that
had to do with the return of defectors
either way from the Soviet side it was
just an insistence that the Yalta
agreement on forced repatriation of
Soviet citizens be honored in a military
context but it totally limited the
ability to do anything with Soviet
defectors in those first several years
so when we went to Austria general Keys
took the opposite position and we had a
free run at Soviet defectors we talked
to over a hundred of them in those 12
months we took about 35 to 40 out and
they were extremely valuable resettle
them all through the courtesy of the
Vatican and Rome Thank You Duke
University
this is directed to the panel as a whole
money of you have mentioned the purposes
in the early years of building databases
and early warning did you ever get any
intimations at the operational level
where all of you are at that president
truman general marshall top leaders in
the congressional military services
wanted anything more elaborate than that
or were you left at your level and this
is the idea i get to basically work
things out as you saw them fill in the
gaps that you knew were needed through
your expertise or the higher echelons of
government at that time pretty much just
like no more pearl harbors and take that
attitude
is that President Truman who after all
took over from President Roosevelt had
very modest requirements for
intelligence all he wanted was that
somebody who would take the days take
from foreign countries and boil it down
so he knew what was going on generally
but there was no specific requirement
under his command to Admiral Leahy and
Admiral sours about the establishment of
the Central Intelligence Group was very
modest indeed it was only later when
General Vandenberg came in that he used
his imagination and creativity to expand
this whole operation and really take a
hard look at this issue of preventing
another Pearl Harbor certainly but early
warning and other issues he was the one
who finally began to organize
intelligence in such a way that when the
National Security Act of 1947 gave
statutory underpinning to intelligence
namely the Central Intelligence Agency
which was formed in that law there were
the manpower and the structure and so
forth which was running which can
continue to run and which obviously was
modified over time but I do want to make
the point that despite the on flux of
the Cold War let's think back to those
late 40s when if I recall accurately
thousands of individuals were trying to
get out of their uniforms and go back to
civilian life the idea of another world
war or a fighting the Soviets and so
forth was not on the agenda in those
days and it was only later as various
things developed that the defenestration
of nazareth they take over of labor
unions in europe various things of this
kind that finally by the end of his
regime President Truman began to realize
it was a lot more to this can of worms
and he had realized originally that was
why I read a little bit from his speech
that if you look at the earlier Truman
and then the later Truman you will see
quite a good deal of development I'd
like to add a little of that earlier
then the very beginning was general
McGruder retired but to see the
Secretary of the army or assistant
secretary of gained Peterson time and he
told me that he was a point V's director
of SSU and coming out of the office
Colonel McCarthy who was his executive
assistant I said well he's told he told
me what my appointment was but he didn't
tell me what to do well McCarthy says
mr. Knight he goes in he comes back he
said Colonel you're supposed to to
preserve the assets of OSS and eliminate
its liabilities now that's a pretty big
order however it turned out to be a
pretty complicating order because was I
going to throw away the canoe and save a
paddle so the idea was to eliminate what
I considered immediately the liabilities
which were those assets which had
nothing to do really with posterity you
had to do with the past the one old
wanted attachment than China Burma the
jet berg teams the closing down of all
established of training eliminating
companies these things of that
description but in the field
I said whole what we have maintained the
agents and so forth and so on and x2 to
cover the same types of targets you've
been covering and so forth so we
eliminate things like morale operations
and except for documentation we kept
that and Benson mentioned was earlier
thought
documentation I had no longer taking
command of SSU when the Treasury
Department came over and said I'd like
you to sign for these people I said what
people he said the people to have in
documentation he said you had the see of
the finest forgers in American history
Donovan got the got the presidents go to
the Secretary of Treasury relation in
your custody anyway coming back to dicks
point on the early aspect was hold what
we had in the field for posterity and
eventually some age the Central
Intelligence Agency Group will take it
over which they did one further point
here which maybe should be made in May
1946 at the time that the SSU was taken
into the Central Intelligence Group the
strength of the SSU at that time was
about a thousand people about two
hundred and Cha and about a hundred and
fifty in Germany and the rest spread all
over the map but that was this little
seedling that eventually sprouted but it
is the tail end of general Quinn's story
here because he got rid of all the rest
of OSS which was considerably larger
than a thousand people seemed to me one
of the most important things we did
without planning it after we had taken
over the Galen organization we began to
have visitors from the Air Force the
army from CIA and very soon you had a
stream of people arriving there for
visitors Bob Bailey came he was
fascinated and sent some of his people
over Sherman camp got deeply involved
now out of this there evolved a dialogue
that went on between say Adolph phrasing
and people like Maxwell Taylor who came
down once
spent two days with us general cavil
came and what there were dozens and
dozens of other generals came stayed
overnight had done it let the German
socially and got briefed by the superb
order of battle expert which is the one
asked at the Galen had that was
unsurpassed by anyone now only that
there grew a decade of high-level
dialogue in a kind of a think-tank
atmosphere between a group of Germans
and a group of Americans who were very
involved in the formative period of the
Western alliance and so when you got to
the point where a de niro was going to
form a government and where the Germans
were going to appear in NATO in uniform
you had a whole group of officers who
had had a ten-year intimate dialogue
with American officers more three of the
services in the CIA and with a good many
political people and I think that was a
tremendous factor in getting the the the
relationship between the Germans when
they entered the Western alliance
getting it off to the right start yes
please
I see New Brunswick a nice ask all the
panel whether it be willing to comment
on what they perceived American
objectives to be in Eastern Europe
during the late 40s and early 50s and
whether they aware of any debate about
the nature of these objectives I'd like
to know what you perceived American
objectives to be in Eastern Europe and
the Soviet Union during the late 40s and
early 50s and whether there was any
debate within the CIA over the nature of
these objectives containment versus
liberation what would the ultimate
objectives of American foreign policy
there is that the American foreign
policy in those days had an objective of
trying to find out what the hell was
going on in Eastern Europe period yeah I
would say we were trying to hang on you
when you looked at the Berlin base for
example of OSS and SSU in 1945-46 we
didn't have a single Russian speaker for
us to have presumed to have some policy
objectives at that time it was too much
I mean that we were just trying to hang
on no feeling coming down from the State
Department that you had any policy
objectives in Eastern Europe Albania was
didn't represent a policy objective
you're you're probably talking about the
office of policy coordination OPC that
was just a handle I was just a name that
didn't have any significance for them I
mean the name had no significance it was
in no sense related to the what they
were supposed to do it was simply a name
picked out of the air as a cover for
this covert action operation and the
whole I realized that in the academic
world there's a theory that things are
rather sensibly run in the government
going along at a certain pace well the
trouble is that they don't in these days
there was a lot of worry in this town
not about objectives toward the Soviet
Union and Eastern Europe but what we're
going to do about the United States
economy which is I suppose most of you
don't realize that during the 30s we
still had a depression going on here and
it was World War two that saved this
country's whole economy but working way
out of that getting all the people out
of uniform back into their jobs and all
the rest of it these factors were there
really the most gripping things that
were going on in the United States and
most of the photos that came back from
the war except some of us who saw these
dangers arising had the feeling that
let's leave your up to Europe Asia to
Asia let's get on with life in the
United States this is where we want to
live this is what we like this is the
most wonderful country in the world the
hell with the rest of it and it took
quite a while to get over that well I
think George Kennan is containment is
the